The challenges facing agricultural systems -- biodiversity loss, climate
change, and corporate consolidation of food production, to name a few --
demand transitions to more environmentally and socially sustainable
agricultural systems
[Hebinck_Klerkx_Elzen_Kok_KÃ¶nig_Schiller_Tschersich_van Mierlo_von
Wirth_2021](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?rSRxF3). Supporting
sustainability transitions, however, is no easy task. While the decision
to adopt a new technology or change behavior is made at the individual
level
[Buttel_Jr_Larson_1990_Rogers_2003](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Y0Mte3),
individuals are shaped by the broader innovation system in which they
are nested [Klerkx_van
Mierlo_Leeuwis_2012](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?DvQAj1). An
innovation system is the complex of interactions between actors and
institutions that nurture and diffuse new technologies or practices
based on several interdependent processes, such as policymaking,
knowledge creation, and market formation
[Bergek_Jacobsson_Carlsson_Lindmark_Rickne_2008](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?sr9u3m).
The interplay between individual behaviors and system level processes is
at the core of successful innovation and transitions. Which processes to
foster for successful transitions, at what scale, and by whom are core
questions in the niche management and innovation system literature
[Binz_Truffer_2017_Musiolik_Markard_Hekkert_Furrer_2020_Smith_Raven_2012_Suurs_2009](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Y02tfR).

Across three chapters, this dissertation addresses questions about
sustainability transitions at both the individual and system levels
using the case of organic seed. Among the inputs necessary for
supporting a sustainable agricultural system, seeds are one of the most
foundational. While the dominant seed breeding approach in countries
like the United States is based on high-input, low-diversity and highly
centralized conventional agricultural practices [Lammerts van
Bueren_Struik_van
Eekeren_Nuijten_2018](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?QxCtrS),
several alternatives (so-called \"niches\") have developed to support a
more sustainable system. This work focuses on the organic agriculture
niche, in which seed production systems are typically low-input and high
diversity with polycentric management
[Colley_2022_Rohe_Oltmer_Wolter_Gmeiner_Tschersich_2022_Shelton_Tracy_2015](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?ZMVKpi).
The focus on organic seeds was inspired by the Organic Seed Alliance\'s
(OSA) *State of Organic Seed Reports*
[Dillon_Hubbard_2011_Hubbard_Zystro_2016](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?T9FO7R).
OSA\'s research conceives of organic seed as part of a broader system --
not just breeding and agronomy, but also policy support, funding
mobilization, community building, and small business development. This
framing mirrors the innovation systems approach, where environmental
challenges require system-level assessments that connect and transcend
disciplines.

The focus of Chapter 1 is on the organic standards in the United States,
specifically, the so-called \"seed loophole\" whereby growers can use
conventional seed if organic seed is not commercially available and
still retain their organic status. We investigate whether this loophole
helps reduce organic growers\' seed sourcing burden, as the policy
intends, or enables them to free-ride by using conventional seed despite
commercial availability. Drawing on organic grower survey data from
three cross-sections over the last 15 years, we use beta regression to
model individual growers\' seed sourcing behavior. The results of the
regression suggest that the loophole is a double-edged sword in that it
both helps growers facing seed sourcing barriers, and allows some
growers to take advantage of the flexibility by reducing their efforts
in sourcing organic seed. The chapter concludes with several policy
recommendations, which align with the 2022 *State of Organic Seed
Report*
[Hubbard_Zystro_Wood_2022](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?XzyfRv).
Beyond, it opens up a wider discussion about competing motivations and
identities in sustainability transitions to be considered in future
research.

Chapters 2 and 3 broaden the scope of study from the individual-level to
the system-level. Both of these chapters draw on innovation system
theory, combined with policy network and social network literature, to
quantify and explain the relationships within the organic seed
innovation system as a network. We use survey data of over 200 organic
seed stakeholders within and outside the United States, collected
between 2020-2022, to create a multi-functional innovation system
network comprising 645 actors and 1206 connections between them. These
connections operationalize knowledge and market-based relationships
between organic seed producers, researchers, companies, and non-profit
organizations.

In detail, Chapter 2 focuses on explaining the spatial structure of the
US organic seed network, testing the propositions defined by the Global
Innovation Systems framework
[Binz_Truffer_2017](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Gd8gyP). Using
n-clan compositional analysis and Exponential Random Graph Modeling, we
find support for the framework\'s proposition that types of innovation
and production valuation are two key conditions predicting the
innovation network\'s spatial structure. In line with these conditions,
we find that the organic seed system has a \"spatially sticky\" network
structure, in that both knowledge creation and product valuation are
territorially embedded in different regions of the country. But even in
a regionally sticky innovation system, we find that national-scale
actors (e.g. the US national germplasm repository) serve a prominent
role in connecting regional networks. These results highlight both the
importance of tailoring policies to the place-specific needs of regional
organic seed systems, and the importance of coordination from
higher-scale actors.

Chapter 3 investigates the processes and actor composition of the
organic seed innovation system. Again using Exponential Random Graph
Modeling on the organic seed networks, we test two theories in parallel:
resource-based theory of system building
[Musiolik_Markard_Hekkert_Furrer_2020](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?H6obWt)
and the institutional logics of the multi-actor perspective
[Avelino_Wittmayer_2016](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?pNAlBv). In
line with the expectations from the resource-based theory, we find that
the organic seed network is shaped primarily by \"partner mode\"
structures, suggesting that cooperative and complementary
resource-sharing relationships drive system formation. Second, our
results align with the proposition that actors\' \"institutional
logics\" affect their activity in certain network functions. For
example, non-profit actors are generally more active in pre-competitive
activities like knowledge creation, while for-profit actors are more
active in market-based functions like value chain creation. The one
exception is governmental actors, who are more active in market-based
functions, pointing to their innovation-nurturing role when niches are
not yet competitive.

Together, the chapters in this dissertation make the following
contributions. Chapter 1 analyzes the effects of the \"seed loophole\"
in the United States organic standard, and makes several policy
recommendations for achieving the intended effects of the policy while
curbing free-riding behavior on the part of organic growers. Chapters 2
and 3 contribute to the field of sustainability transitions by
empirically testing and extending innovation system theory using
inferential network analysis. By employing Exponential Random Graph
Models, these chapters not only describe the organic seed network, but
also investigate its structural determinants to help build a more
generalizable understanding of innovation system formation. This work
combines theory and methods from the two otherwise disparate bodies of
knowledge on innovation systems and policy networks, to help deepen our
understanding of managing and supporting sustainability transitions.

# References

[\@article{Avelino_Wittmayer_2016, title={Shifting Power Relations in
Sustainability Transitions: A Multi-actor Perspective}, volume={18},
ISSN={1523-908X}, DOI={10.1080/1523908X.2015.1112259},
abstractNote={This paper contributes to understanding transition
politics by conceptualizing (shifting) power relations between actors in
sustainability transitions. The authors introduce a Multi-actor
Perspective as a heuristic framework for specifying (shifting) power
relations between different categories of actors at different levels of
aggregation. First, an overview is provided of how power and empowerment
have been treated in transition research, and remaining questions are
identified on who exercises power and who is empowered by and with whom.
It is argued that theoretical frameworks and empirical analyses in
transition studies lack precision when it comes to distinguishing
between different types and levels of actors. In response, a Multi-actor
Perspective (MaP) is developed, which distinguishes among four sectors
(state, market, community, third sector), and between actors at
different levels of aggregation: (1) sectors, (2) organizational actors,
and (3) individual actors. The paper moves on to specify how the MaP
contributes to understanding transition politics specifically in
conceptualizing shifting power relations. Throughout the paper,
empirical illustrations are used regarding public debates on welfare
state reform, civil society and 'Big Society', as well as more specific
empirical examples of community energy initiatives.}, number={5},
journal={Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning},
publisher={Routledge}, author={Avelino, Flor and Wittmayer, Julia M.},
year={2016}, month={Oct}, pages={628--649}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@article{Bergek_Jacobsson_Carlsson_Lindmark_Rickne_2008,
title={Analyzing the functional dynamics of technological innovation
systems: A scheme of analysis}, volume={37}, ISSN={0048-7333},
DOI={10.1016/j.respol.2007.12.003}, abstractNote={Various researchers
and policy analysts have made empirical studies of innovation systems in
order to understand their current structure and trace their dynamics.
However, policy makers often experience difficulties in extracting
practical guidelines from studies of this kind. In this paper, we
operationalize our previous work on a functional approach to analyzing
innovation system dynamics into a practical scheme of analysis for
policy makers. The scheme is based on previous literature and our own
experience in developing and applying functional thinking. It can be
used by policy makers not only to identify the key policy issues but
also to set policy goals.}, number={3}, journal={Research Policy},
author={Bergek, Anna and Jacobsson, Staffan and Carlsson, Bo and
Lindmark, Sven and Rickne, Annika}, year={2008}, month={Apr},
pages={407--429}, language={en}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@article{Binz_Truffer_2017, title={Global Innovation Systems---A
conceptual framework for innovation dynamics in transnational contexts},
volume={46}, ISSN={0048-7333}, DOI={10.1016/j.respol.2017.05.012},
abstractNote={This paper proposes a framework for the analysis of
technological innovation processes in transnational contexts. By drawing
on existing innovation system concepts and recent elaborations on the
globalization of innovation, we develop a multi-scalar conceptualization
of innovation systems. Two key mechanisms are introduced and elaborated:
the generation of resources in multi-locational subsystems and the
establishment of structural couplings among them in a global innovation
system (GIS). Based on this conceptualization, we introduce a typology
of four generic GIS configurations, building on the innovation mode and
valuation system in different industry types. The analytical framework
is illustrated with insights from four emerging clean-tech industries.
We state that a comprehensive GIS perspective is instrumental for
developing a more explanatory stance in the innovation system literature
and developing policy interventions that reflect the increasing spatial
complexity in the innovation process.}, number={7}, journal={Research
Policy}, author={Binz, Christian and Truffer, Bernhard}, year={2017},
month={Sep}, pages={1284--1298}, language={en}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@book{Buttel_Jr_Larson_1990, address={New York}, edition={y First
printing edition}, title={The Sociology of Agriculture:},
ISBN={978-0-313-26444-3}, abstractNote={Published to commemorate the
50th anniversary of the Rural Sociological Society, this monograph
analyzes the nearly 90 years of rural sociological research on
agriculture and provides a comprehensive overview of changing research
focuses and theoretical approaches. As the authors note at the outset,
there are a good number of continuities between early-20th-century rural
sociology and what is now called the sociology of agriculture. There are
also, they note, very substantial differences between contemporary
sociology of agriculture scholarship and that which preceded it. Their
aim throughout is to convey both continuities and discontinuities in
theory, method, and approach. Intended primarily as a straightforward
exposition of major scholarly themes, the volume is designed to be
useful to readers from a variety of theoretical persuasions. The authors
do, however, point to areas of weakness in theoretical or methodological
approach that should be addressed in future research.The volume is
organized around the three major eras of rural sociological
conceptualizations of agriculture. The authors begin by examining the
founding of U.S. rural sociology shortly after the turn of the century
until the early 1950s, demonstrating that during this initial era the
study of agriculture was largely construed as one of the many elements
necessary for understanding the social fabric of rural community life.
In the next section, they explore the social psychological/behaviorist
tradition, which held sway from the early 1950s through the early 1970s
and which conceptualized farmers as actors responding to stimuli such as
new technologies and educational opportunities. The three chapters
devoted to recent research in the emerging tradition of the new rural
sociology address such topics as the political economy of agriculture,
the environment of agriculture, and major theoretical trends in the
sociology of agriculture. In their concluding chapter, the authors look
toward the future of the sociology of agriculture and identify some
potential problems as we move into the 1990s.}, publisher={Praeger},
author={Buttel, Frederick H. and Jr, Gilbert W. Gillespie and Larson,
Olaf F.}, year={1990}, month={Feb}, language={English}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@phdthesis{Colley_2022, title={Critical experiences in participatory
approaches to build up organic plant breeding and seed systems},
url={https://research.wur.nl/en/publications/09218969-dc06-4fe9-91af-db058becaa3b},
DOI={10.18174/578477}, school={Wageningen University}, author={Colley,
Micaela Ruth}, year={2022}, month={Nov}, language={en}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@book{Dillon_Hubbard_2011, address={Port Townsend, WA}, title={State
of Organic Seed, 2011}, institution={Organic Seed Allaince},
author={Dillon, Matthew and Hubbard, Kiki}, year={2011}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@article{Hebinck_Klerkx_Elzen_Kok_KÃ¶nig_Schiller_Tschersich_van
Mierlo_von Wirth_2021, series={Celebrating a decade of EIST: What's next
for transition studies?}, title={Beyond food for thought -- Directing
sustainability transitions research to address fundamental change in
agri-food systems}, volume={41}, ISSN={2210-4224},
DOI={10.1016/j.eist.2021.10.003}, abstractNote={Dominant agricultural
and food systems lead to continuous resource depletion and unacceptable
environmental and social impacts. While current calls for changing
agrifood systems are increasingly framed in the context of
sustainability transitions, they rarely make an explicit link to
transition studies to address these systemic challenges, nor do
transition scholars sufficiently address agri-food systems, despite
their global pertinence. From this viewpoint, we illustrate several gaps
in the agri-food systems debate that sustainability transition studies
could engage in. We propose four avenues for research in the next decade
of transition research on agri-food systems: 1) Crossscale dynamics
between coupled systems; 2) Social justice, equity and inclusion; 3)
Sustainability transitions in low- and middle-income countries; 4)
Cross-sectoral governance and system integration. We call for a decade
of new transition research that moves beyond single-scale and sector
perspectives toward more inclusive and integrated analyses of food
system dynamics.}, journal={Environmental Innovation and Societal
Transitions}, author={Hebinck, Aniek and Klerkx, Laurens and Elzen,
Boelie and Kok, Kristiaan P. W. and KÃ¶nig, Bettina and Schiller,
Katharina and Tschersich, Julia and van Mierlo, Barbara and von Wirth,
Timo}, year={2021}, month={Dec}, pages={81--85}, collection={Celebrating
a decade of EIST: What's next for transition studies?}, language={en}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@book{Hubbard_Zystro_2016, title={State of Organic Seed 2016},
url={http://seedalliance.org/index.php?mact=DocumentStore,cntnt01,download_form,0&cntnt01pid=7&cntnt01returnid=139},
institution={Organic Seed Alliance}, author={Hubbard, Kiki and Zystro,
Jared}, year={2016}, pages={113}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@book{Hubbard_Zystro_Wood_2022, address={Port Townsend, WA},
title={State of Organic Seed}, institution={Organic Seed Alliance},
author={Hubbard, Kiki and Zystro, Jared and Wood, Liza}, year={2022},
language={en} }](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@inbook{Klerkx_van Mierlo_Leeuwis_2012, title={Evolution of systems
approaches to agricultural innovation: concepts, analysis and
interventions}, ISBN={978-94-007-4503-2},
DOI={10.1007/978-94-007-4503-2}, abstractNote={Farming Systems Research
has three core characteristics: it builds on systems thinking, it
depends on the close collaboration between social and biophysical
sciences, and it relies on participation to build co-learning processes.
Farming Systems Research posits that to contribute towards sustainable
rural development, both interdisciplinary collaborations and local actor
engagement are needed. Together, they allow for changes in understanding
and changes in practices. This book gives an overview of the insights
generated in 20 years of Farming Systems Research. It retraces the
emergence and development of Farming Systems Research in Europe,
summarises the state-of-the-art for key areas, and provides an outlook
on new explorations, especially those tackling the dynamic nature of
farming systems and their interaction with the natural environment and
the context of action.}, booktitle={Farming Systems Research into the
21st Century: The New Dynamic}, author={Klerkx, Laureans and van Mierlo,
Barbara and Leeuwis, Cees}, editor={Darnhofer, Ika and Gibbon, David and
Dedieu, Benoit}, year={2012}, pages={457--483}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@article{Lammerts van Bueren_Struik_van Eekeren_Nuijten_2018,
title={Towards resilience through systems-based plant breeding. A
review}, volume={38}, ISSN={17730155}, DOI={10.1007/s13593-018-0522-6},
abstractNote={How the growing world population can feed itself is a
crucial, multi-dimensional problem that goes beyond sustainable
development. Crop production will be affected by many changes in its
climatic, agronomic, economic, and societal contexts. Therefore,
breeders are challenged to produce cultivars that strengthen both
ecological and societal resilience by striving for six international
sustainability targets: food security, safety and quality; food and seed
sovereignty; social justice; agrobiodiversity; ecosystem services; and
climate robustness. Against this background, we review the state of the
art in plant breeding by distinguishing four paradigmatic orientations
that currently co-exist: community-based breeding, ecosystem-based
breeding, trait-based breeding, and corporate-based breeding, analyzing
differences among these orientations. Our main findings are: (1) all
four orientations have significant value but none alone will achieve all
six sustainability targets; (2) therefore, an overarching approach is
needed: "systems-based breeding," an orientation with the potential to
synergize the strengths of the ways of thinking in the current
paradigmatic orientations; (3) achieving that requires specific
knowledge development and integration, a multitude of suitable breeding
strategies and tools, and entrepreneurship, but also a change in
attitude based on corporate responsibility, circular economy and
true-cost accounting, and fair and green policies. We conclude that
systems-based breeding can create strong interactions between all system
components. While seeds are part of the common good and the basis of
agrobiodiversity, a diversity in breeding approaches, based on different
entrepreneurial approaches, can also be considered part of the required
agrobiodiversity. To enable systems-based breeding to play a major role
in creating sustainable agriculture, a shared sense of urgency is needed
to realize the required changes in breeding approaches, institutions,
regulations and protocols. Based on this concept of systems-based
breeding, there are opportunities for breeders to play an active role in
the development of an ecologically and societally resilient, sustainable
agriculture.}, number={5}, journal={Agronomy for Sustainable
Development}, publisher={Springer-Verlag France}, author={Lammerts van
Bueren, Edith T. and Struik, Paul C. and van Eekeren, Nick and Nuijten,
Edwin}, year={2018}, month={Oct}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@article{Musiolik_Markard_Hekkert_Furrer_2020, title={Creating
innovation systems: How resource constellations affect the strategies of
system builders}, volume={153}, ISSN={0040-1625},
DOI={10.1016/j.techfore.2018.02.002}, abstractNote={Novel technologies
require the support of larger technological innovation systems (TIS). A
key feature of innovation systems are system resources - collective
structures such as common standards, support programs, shared
expectations or testing facilities all actors can use. System resources
emerge either uncoordinated or as a result of strategic action by
'system builders'. In this paper we explore the conditions of system
building. Taking a strategy perspective, we analyze how system building
depends on resource constellations at a certain point in time. Drawing
from research in the field of stationary fuel cells in Germany, we
identify three generic modes, of system building: a) the "single mode",
in which a system builder uses its own organizational resources to
create a system resource, b) the "partner mode", in which a system
builder joins forces with partners in order to co-create system
resources, and c) the "intermediary mode", in which a system builder
collaborates with other actors to set up an intermediary organization,
which then works towards the creation of system resources. We show that
the modes were chosen depending on i) what resources were initially
available and ii) how they were distributed in the innovation system.
Our paper contributes to a more differentiated understanding of system
building in the TIS literature and beyond.}, journal={Technological
Forecasting and Social Change}, author={Musiolik, JÃ¶rg and Markard,
Jochen and Hekkert, Marko and Furrer, Bettina}, year={2020},
month={Apr}, pages={119209}, language={en}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@book{Rogers_2003, address={New York}, edition={5th edition},
title={Diffusion of Innovations, 5th Edition}, ISBN={978-0-7432-2209-9},
abstractNote={Now in its fifth edition, Diffusion of Innovations is a
classic work on the spread of new ideas.In this renowned book, Everett
M. Rogers, professor and chair of the Department of Communication &
Journalism at the University of New Mexico, explains how new ideas
spread via communication channels over time. Such innovations are
initially perceived as uncertain and even risky. To overcome this
uncertainty, most people seek out others like themselves who have
already adopted the new idea. Thus the diffusion process consists of a
few individuals who first adopt an innovation, then spread the word
among their circle of acquaintances---a process which typically takes
months or years. But there are exceptions: use of the Internet in the
1990s, for example, may have spread more rapidly than any other
innovation in the history of humankind. Furthermore, the Internet is
changing the very nature of diffusion by decreasing the importance of
physical distance between people. The fifth edition addresses the spread
of the Internet, and how it has transformed the way human beings
communicate and adopt new ideas.}, publisher={Free Press},
author={Rogers, Everett M.}, year={2003}, month={Aug},
language={English} }](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@article{Rohe_Oltmer_Wolter_Gmeiner_Tschersich_2022, title={Forever
niche: Why do organically bred vegetable varieties not diffuse?},
volume={45}, ISSN={2210-4224}, DOI={10.1016/j.eist.2022.09.004},
abstractNote={While organic food increased its market share in
conventional food retail, virtually all organic vegetables are still
conventionally bred. For decades, organically bred vegetable varieties
remained a market niche, despite their socio-ecological benefits. This
paper conceptualizes actors and activities around organic breeding as a
Technological Innovation System (TIS) and analyzes what prevents these
varieties from widely diffusing into conventional supermarkets.
Investigated systemic barriers relate to knowledge, market formation,
investments, and legitimacy. The study is based on interviews with food
retailers and (commons-based) breeding initiatives across Germany.
Theoretically, the paper adds an innovation system perspective on the
diffusion of organically bred varieties, a blind spot in the emerging
seed commons debate. Furthermore, it contributes to sustainability
transitions literature by introducing a novel empirical topic and
reframing the TIS framework to analyze agri-food innovations.
Identifying barriers and vicious cycles might support practitioners and
policymakers seeking to diffuse this agri-food niche.},
journal={Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions},
author={Rohe, Sebastian and Oltmer, Marie and Wolter, Hendrik and
Gmeiner, Nina and Tschersich, Julia}, year={2022}, month={Dec},
pages={83--100}, language={en}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@article{Shelton_Tracy_2015, title={Recurrent selection and
participatory plant breeding for improvement of two organic
open-pollinated sweet corn (Zea mays L.) populations}, volume={7},
ISSN={20711050}, DOI={10.3390/su7055139}, abstractNote={Organic growers
face unique challenges when raising sweet corn, and benefit from
varieties that maintain high eating quality, germinate consistently,
deter insect pests, and resist diseases. Genotype by environment rank
changes can occur in the performance of cultivars grown on conventional
and organic farms, yet few varieties have been bred specifically for
organic systems. The objective of this experiment was to evaluate the
changes made to open-pollinated sweet corn populations using recurrent
selection and a participatory plant breeding (PPB) methodology. From
2008 to 2011, four cycles of two open-pollinated (OP) sweet corn
populations were selected on a certified organic farm in Minnesota using
a modified ear-to-row recurrent selection scheme. Selections were made
in collaboration with an organic farmer, with selection criteria based
on traits identified by the farmer. In 2012 and 2013, the population
cycles were evaluated in a randomized complete block design in two
certified organic locations in Wisconsin, with multiple replications in
each environment. Significant linear trends were found among cycles of
selection for quantitative and qualitative traits, suggesting the
changes were due to recurrent selection and PPB methodology for these
populations. However, further improvement is necessary to satisfy the
requirements for a useful cultivar for organic growers.}, number={5},
journal={Sustainability (Switzerland)}, publisher={MDPI AG},
author={Shelton, Adrienne C. and Tracy, William F.}, year={2015},
pages={5139--5152} }](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@article{Smith_Raven_2012, title={What is protective space?
Reconsidering niches in transitions to sustainability}, volume={41},
ISSN={00487333}, DOI={10.1016/J.RESPOL.2011.12.012}, abstractNote={The
transitions literature emphasises the role of niches, defined as a
protective space for path-breaking innovations. Surprisingly, the
concept of protection has not been systematically interrogated. Our
analysis identifies effective protection as having three properties in
wider transition processes: shielding, nurturing and empowerment.
Empowerment is considered the least developed in current niche
literature. It can be understood as either processes that make niche
innovations competitive within unchanged selection environments
(fit-and-conform) or as processes that contribute to changes in
mainstream selection environments in ways favourable to a path-breaking
niche innovation (stretch-and-transform). Adopting a more constructivist
perspective, we subsequently argue that analysis of these properties
needs to be complemented with particular attention for the politics
involved in their construction. Attention to empowerment confirms the
view that niche actors need to link to wider processes of social change,
and suggests how this arises. The paper ends with an outlook upon two
promising research avenues: (1) the reconstruction of niche development
in light of the present framework; (2) analyses of the diverse
(political) narratives seeking to empower niches across time and space.
Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.}, number={6},
journal={Research Policy}, author={Smith, Adrian and Raven, Rob},
year={2012}, month={Jul}, pages={1025--1036}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)

[\@phdthesis{Suurs_2009, title={Motors of Sustainable Innovation},
url={https://dspace.library.uu.nl/handle/1874/33346}, school={Utrecht
University}, author={Suurs, R. A.A.}, year={2009}
}](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?Bgr4Nu)
